Mitigating Network Vulnerabilities Blog Post (#100)
neoforged/websites: content/news/mitigating-vulnerabilities-network.md

---
title: "Mitigating Network Vulnerabilities"
date: 2026-05-11
draft: false
categories:
- News
author: championash5357
summary: |
    This blog post explains NeoForge's patch for a network object allocation exploit,
    and how modders can mitigate these issues in their own serverbound packets.
---

# Mitigating Vulnerabilities: Network Object Allocation

NeoForge 26.1.2.44-beta and 21.1.229 fixed a potential exploit where a client could crash the server using a maliciously crafted network packet. Users can either upgrade to the latest NeoForge for 26.1.2 / 1.21.1, or install Drex's `CrashExploitFixer` ([CurseForge](https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/crashexploitfixer) / [Modrinth](https://modrinth.com/mod/crashexploitfixer)) to mitigate this issue.

For most users, that's enough information to not have to worry about the issue. But what does it mean to exploit a network packet? Does it mean mods are vulnerable?

Let's dive deeper to get a better understanding of how this exploit occurs and what can be done to mitigate it.

## Understanding Network Vulnerabilities

> When we talk about network vulnerabilities, we are generally talking about exploiting serverbound requests in one form or another. This is because the client typically has to "trust" the server is not going to download something malicious, whereas the server can't assume every client that's connected is acting in good faith. As such, the server must validate and sanitize anything it receives from the client.

Reviewer: I find "download" a bit out of context here, I would go along the lines of:
```suggestion
When we talk about network vulnerabilities, we are generally talking about exploiting serverbound requests in one form or another. This is because the client typically has to "trust" the server as the authoritative party and that it is not going to operate maliciously, whereas the server can't assume every client that's connected is acting in good faith. As such, the server must validate and sanitize anything it receives from the client.
```

### Object Allocation

One such sanitization process has to do with object allocation: where the game requests and reserves a block of memory to store an object. For most data types, this will generally be a relatively small number of bytes (e.g., an `int` is 4 bytes, while a reference is either 4 or 8 bytes depending on JVM settings). However, arrays provide a different story.

> When declaring an array, you have to specify an initial capacity that declares it size, whether that'd be directly through the `new` constructor, or by passing in a certain number of elements into the declaration. As such, the array will attempt to allocate the data type size times the capacity. For example, if we declared a `new Object[10]`, where each object reference is 4 bytes, then at least 4 * 10 = 40 bytes will be allocated by the array. That doesn't sound like a lot at first, but what if we instead use `Integer.MAX_VALUE` as the capacity? Then, the array will attempt to allocate 4 * 2^31 = 8,589,934,592 bytes, or ~8GiB of data. As you can imagine, depending on the Minecraft server settings, you can easily cause an `OutOfMemoryException` to be thrown.

Reviewer: A bit pedantic, but I would phrase as "approach" or "near" the max integer value, or just a high value. Generally such an array construction will fail directly prealloc: [ArraysSupport.java#L842-L854](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/blob/22b46872d0d647c9ef9f4414b4685afa8313926d/src/java.base/share/classes/jdk/internal/util/ArraysSupport.java#L842-L854)

Author: I went with the near approach since I think the "8GiB" initial allocation makes it clear that's attempting to do something with a lot of data. Though I did also include the link for `ArraysSupport` as a little aside since it's pretty funny.

> When declaring an array, you have to specify an initial capacity that declares it size, whether that'd be directly through the `new` constructor, or by passing in a certain number of elements into the declaration. As such, the array will attempt to allocate the data type size times the capacity. For example, if we declared a `new Object[10]`, where each object reference is 4 bytes, then at least 4 * 10 = 40 bytes will be allocated by the array. That doesn't sound like a lot at first, but what if we instead use `Integer.MAX_VALUE` as the capacity? Then, the array will attempt to allocate 4 * 2^31 = 8,589,934,592 bytes, or ~8GiB of data. As you can imagine, depending on the Minecraft server settings, you can easily cause an `OutOfMemoryException` to be thrown.

Reviewer: grammar:
```suggestion
When declaring an array, you have to specify an initial capacity that declares its size, whether that'd be directly through the `new` constructor, or by passing in a certain number of elements into the declaration. As such, the array will attempt to allocate the data type size times the capacity. For example, if we declared a `new Object[10]`, where each object reference is 4 bytes, then at least 4 * 10 = 40 bytes will be allocated by the array. That doesn't sound like a lot at first, but what if we instead use `Integer.MAX_VALUE` as the capacity? Then, the array will attempt to allocate 4 * 2^31 = 8,589,934,592 bytes, or ~8GiB of data. As you can imagine, depending on the Minecraft server settings, you can easily cause an `OutOfMemoryException` to be thrown.
```

## The Exploit

With this knowledge, let's look at one of the exploit points in `FriendlyByteBuf#readCollection`:

```java
// From `FriendlyByteBuf`
public <T, C extends Collection<T>> C readCollection(IntFunction<C> ctor, StreamDecoder<? super FriendlyByteBuf, T> elementDecoder) {
    int count = this.readVarInt();
    C result = (C) ctor.apply(count);

    // ...
}
```

As you can see, first the `count` is read from the buffer, which is then passed to the `IntFunction` to construct the `Collection`. How does it construct the collection? Well, looking at one of its callers `readList`, it passed in `Lists::newArrayListWithCapacity`, which constructs a new `ArrayList<C>` by calling `new Object[count]`.

Notice the issue? The `count` variable is provided by the client, meaning it leaves open the potential for exploitation. The same goes for `readMap` as, under the hood, all these collections of elements are doing is providing a unique method to wrap around an array.

## The Mitigation Strategy

> If that's the case, wouldn't that mean sending any collection across the network is vulnerable to such an attack? Well, no. Let's take at another implementation provided by `StreamCodec`s:

Reviewer: grammar:
```suggestion
If that's the case, wouldn't that mean sending any collection across the network is vulnerable to such an attack? Well, no. Let's take a look at another implementation provided by `StreamCodec`s:
```

    IntFunction<C> constructor, StreamCodec<? super B, V> elementCodec, int maxSize
) {
    return new StreamCodec<B, C>() {
        @Override
        public C decode(B input) {
            int count = ByteBufCodecs.readCount(input, maxSize);
            C result = constructor.apply(Math.min(count, MAX_INITIAL_COLLECTION_SIZE));

            // ...
        }

        @Override
        public void encode(B output, C value) {
            // ...
        }
    };
}
```

Here, we can see the same implementation, except that the `count` is first min-ed with the `MAX_INITIAL_COLLECTION_SIZE`, or 65,536 entries. This limits the initial allocation to around ~256KiB, which is unlikely to crash the server. The collection will still increase its capacity if you are sending more than 65,536 entries, but at that point, you are limited by the max packet size of ~2MiB compressed (~8MiB uncompressed) and NeoForge's own payload size limit of ~32KiB.

NeoForge used the same strategy that `ByteBufCodec`s does: limiting the initial allocation of collections and maps to the `ByteBufCodecs.MAX_INITIAL_COLLECTION_SIZE`.

## What does this mean for mods?

> For most mods, nothing changes. The mod loaders have mitigated the issue, so unless you are reimplementing `readCollection` or `readMap` yourself, a mod will not be vulnerable. However, this assumes that the data your packets are sending are properly sending only what's necessary to the server.

Reviewer: The sentence phrasing for "data your packets are sending" sounds like client side validation rather than the correct server boundary, I would go with:
```suggestion
For most mods, nothing changes. The mod loaders have mitigated the issue, so unless you are reimplementing `readCollection` or `readMap` yourself, a mod will not be vulnerable. However, this assumes that the data your packets contain is limited to only what's necessary and that the server is properly validating what it receives.
```

> For most mods, nothing changes. The mod loaders have mitigated the issue, so unless you are reimplementing `readCollection` or `readMap` yourself, a mod will not be vulnerable. However, this assumes that the data your packets contain is limited to only what's necessary and that the server is properly validating what it receives.

Reviewer 2: Would it be worth specifying exactly which mod loaders have fixed this on which versions? Fabric and NeoForge have done so on 1.21.1 and 26.1, but that still leaves a lot of versions vulnerable. I know this was covered on Discord, but I imagine the website reaches a lot more people than Discord.

Author: I gave that TL;DR at the top for people who didn't read this far. I could repeat it here, but ultimately, it ends with the same conclusion that mods shouldn't have to do anything, unless they are doing weird and wacky things. Even if they aren't, the last line at the end concludes with set a maximum capacity.

Reviewer: Yeah this is a good point, I think most importantly server owners would need to be aware, so perhaps tldr could say "Players and server owners" more explicitly than the current "Users".

But I do think it makes sense to mention it does impact older versions in different loaders/mods broadly so `CrashExploitFixer` be presented as the option there directly. This may lean more into also just recognizing this is somewhat longstanding gotcha in those MC functions but more generally unprotected allocation is a common issue regardless. I could see mentioning [CWE-789](https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/789.html) as well for context.

> If you ever looked at a vanilla serverbound packet (e.g., `ServerboundEditBookPacket`, `ServerboundChangeGameModePacket`), you can see that the amount of data sent in each is relatively sparse. The packet only provides enough information such that the server understands what the client's intention is, using the data stored on the server to fill in the rest of the gaps (e.g., `ServerboundEditBookPacket` sends the slot the stack is in, rather than the `ItemStack` itself). Additionally, many of the serverbound packets that make use of variable types define limits on how much data can be sent to the server in one packet.

Reviewer: It may be helpful to mention the one unprivileged place `readCollection` is used on the server in somewhere around here. The vanilla hard limit strategy of `limitValue` hasn't been mentioned.

`ServerboundChatCommandSignedPacket` containing an `ArgumentSignatures`:
```java
public ArgumentSignatures(final FriendlyByteBuf input) {
  this(input.readCollection(FriendlyByteBuf.limitValue(ArrayList::new, 8), ArgumentSignatures.Entry::new));
}

```

The only packet that steps away from this rule is `ServerboundSetCreativeModeSlotPacket`, which can be exploited depending on the `DataComponentType`s available on the `ItemStack`. Though in that case, an additional validation is performed to make sure the server player's `Abilities.instabuild` (e.g., in creative mode) is true before attempting to decode.

> With these points in mind, modded serverbound packets should attempt to replicate vanilla: send the smallest amount of data possible needed to perform the appropriate action on the server. And if you need to allocation any kind of collection or map of elements, set a maximum capacity.

Reviewer: As earlier, reframe authority. Also fix "allocation" -> "allocate"
```suggestion
With these points in mind, modded serverbound packets should attempt to replicate vanilla: contain only the minimal information required to perform the appropriate action on the server. And if you need to allocate any kind of collection or map of elements, set a maximum capacity.
```

One such sanitization process has to do with object allocation: where the game requests and reserves a block of memory to store an object. For most data types, this will generally be a relatively small number of bytes (e.g., an `int` is 4 bytes, while a reference is either 4 or 8 bytes depending on JVM settings). However, arrays provide a different story.

> When declaring an array, you have to specify an initial capacity that declares its size, whether that'd be directly through the `new` constructor, or by passing in a certain number of elements into the declaration. As such, the array will attempt to allocate the data type size times the capacity. For example, if we declared a `new Object[10]`, where each object reference is 4 bytes, then at least 4 * 10 = 40 bytes will be allocated by the array. That doesn't sound like a lot at first, but what if we instead near `Integer.MAX_VALUE` as the capacity? Then, the array will attempt to allocate around 4 * 2^31 = 8,589,934,592 bytes, or ~8GiB of data. As you can imagine, depending on the Minecraft server settings, you can easily cause an `OutOfMemoryException` to be thrown, either due to a lack of sufficient memory or the [JVM purposely crashing](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/blob/22b46872d0d647c9ef9f4414b4685afa8313926d/src/java.base/share/classes/jdk/internal/util/ArraysSupport.java#L854).

Reviewer: Actually, I think this section could be more accurately framed that the exploit is successfully allocating large amounts of memory usually. Though an OOM throwing could be a problem if not caught, that part is not resource costly. A successful allocation 1-2G requires claiming/initializing that large area of memory. That is where the DOS mostly comes from, though it can be possible to OOM the main thread during the short lifespan of this array for a hard crash, usually the low TPS being what gets watchdog to kill the server.

Reviewer: And it wouldn't be need to be that in-depth, just that allocating large amounts of memory is the problem, not that it fails to allocate all-together immediately.
